README.md, before:

# Triton Command Line Interface (Triton CLI)
> [!NOTE]
> Triton CLI is currently in BETA. Its features and functionality are likely
> to change as we collect feedback. We're excited to hear any thoughts you
> have (especially if you find the tool useful) and what features you'd like
> to see!

Triton CLI is an open source command line interface that enables users to
create, deploy, and profile models served by the Triton Inference
Server.

## Table of Contents

| [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites) | [Installation](#installation) | [Quickstart](#quickstart) | [Serving LLM Models](#serving-llm-models) | [Serving a vLLM Model](#serving-a-vllm-model) | [Serving a TRT-LLM Model](#serving-a-trt-llm-model) | [Additional Dependencies for Custom Environments](#additional-dependencies-for-custom-environments) | [Known Limitations](#known-limitations) |

## Pre-requisites

When using Triton and related tools on your host (outside of a Triton container
image) there are a number of additional dependencies that may be required for
various workflows. Most system dependency issues can be resolved by installing
and running the CLI from within the latest corresponding `tritonserver`
container image, which should have all necessary system dependencies installed.

For vLLM and TRT-LLM, you can use their respective images:
- `nvcr.io/nvidia/tritonserver:{YY.MM}-vllm-python-py3`
- `nvcr.io/nvidia/tritonserver:{YY.MM}-trtllm-python-py3`

If you decide to run the CLI on the host or in a custom image, please
see this list of [additional dependencies](#additional-dependencies-for-custom-environments)
you may need to install.


## Installation

Currently, Triton CLI can only be installed from source, with plans to host a
pip wheel soon. When installing Triton CLI, please be aware of the versioning
matrix below:

| Triton CLI Version | TRT-LLM Version | Triton Container Tag |
|:------------------:|:---------------:|:--------------------:|
| 0.0.6 | v0.8.0 | 24.02 |
| 0.0.5 | v0.7.1 | 24.01 |

### Install from Source

```bash
# Clone repo, git mode for development/contribution
git clone git@github.com:triton-inference-server/triton_cli.git
cd triton_cli

# Should be pointing at directory containing pyproject.toml
pip install .
```

## Quickstart
The instructions below outline the process of deploying a simple `gpt2`
model using Triton's [vLLM backend](https://github.com/triton-inference-server/vllm_backend).
If you are not in an environment where the `tritonserver` executable is
present, Triton CLI will automatically generate and run a custom image
capable of serving the model. This behavior is subject to change.
```bash
# Explore the commands
triton -h

# Add a vLLM model to the model repository, downloaded from HuggingFace
triton import -m gpt2

# Start server pointing at the default model repository
triton start

# Infer with CLI
triton infer -m gpt2 --prompt "machine learning is"

# Infer with curl using the generate endpoint
curl -X POST localhost:8000/v2/models/gpt2/generate -d '{"text_input": "machine learning is", "max_tokens": 128}'

# Profile model with Perf Analyzer
triton profile -m gpt2
```

## Serving LLM Models

Triton CLI is particularly adept at simplifying the workflow to deploy and
interact with LLM models. The steps below illustrate how to serve a vLLM
or TRT-LLM model from scratch in minutes.

> [!NOTE]
> Usage of `llama-2-7b` requires authentication in Huggingface through either
> `huggingface-login` or setting the `HF_TOKEN` environment variable.

### Serving a vLLM Model

The following models have currently been tested for vLLM through the CLI:
- `gpt2`
- `llama-2-7b`
- `opt125m`
- `mistral-7b`
- `falcon-7b`

```bash
# Generate a Triton model repository containing a vLLM model config
triton remove -m all
triton import -m gpt2 --backend vllm

# Start Triton pointing at the default model repository
triton start

# Interact with model
triton infer -m gpt2 --prompt "machine learning is"

# Profile model with Perf Analyzer
triton profile -m gpt2
```

### Serving a TRT-LLM Model

> [!NOTE]
> By default, TRT-LLM engines are generated in `/tmp/engines/{model_name}`,
> such as `/tmp/engines/gpt2`. They are intentionally kept outside of the model
> repository to improve re-usability across examples and repositories. This
> default location is subject to change, but can be customized with the
> `ENGINE_DEST_PATH` environment variable.
>
> The model configurations generated by the CLI prioritize accessibility over
> performance. As such, the default number of model instances for each model
> will be set to 1. This value can be manually tuned post-generation by
> modifying the `instance_group` field in each model's corresponding
> `config.pbtxt` file. Increasing the instance counts may result in improved
> performance, especially for large batch sizes. For more information, please
> see [here](https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/triton-inference-server/user-guide/docs/user_guide/model_configuration.html#instance-groups).

#### Pre-requisites

(optional) If you don't want to install TRT-LLM dependencies on the host, you
can also run the following instructions inside of a container that is launched
with the following command:
```bash
# NOTE: Mounting the huggingface cache is optional, but will allow saving and
# re-using downloaded huggingface models across different runs and containers.

# NOTE: Mounting /tmp is also optional, but will allow the saving and re-use of
# TRT-LLM engines across different containers. This assumes the value of
# `ENGINE_DEST_PATH` has not been modified.

docker run -ti \
  --gpus all \
  --network=host \
  --shm-size=1g --ulimit memlock=-1 \
  -v /tmp:/tmp \
  -v $HOME/.cache/huggingface:/root/.cache/huggingface \
  nvcr.io/nvidia/tritonserver:24.02-trtllm-python-py3
```

Install the TRT-LLM dependencies:
```bash
# Install TRT LLM building dependencies
pip install \
  "psutil" \
  "pynvml>=11.5.0" \
  "torch==2.1.2" \
  "tensorrt_llm==0.8.0" --extra-index-url https://pypi.nvidia.com/
```

#### Example

The following models are currently supported for automating TRT-LLM
engine builds through the CLI:
> [!NOTE]
> Building a TRT-LLM engine for `llama-2-7b` will require a system
> with at least 64GB of RAM.
- `gpt2`
- `llama-2-7b`
-  `opt125m`

```bash
# Build TRT LLM engine and generate a Triton model repository pointing at it
triton remove -m all
triton import -m gpt2 --backend tensorrtllm

# Start Triton pointing at the default model repository
triton start

# Interact with model
triton infer -m gpt2 --prompt "machine learning is"

# Profile model with Perf Analyzer
triton profile -m gpt2 --backend tensorrtllm
```
## Additional Dependencies for Custom Environments

When using Triton CLI outside of official Triton NGC containers, you may
encounter the following issues, indicating additional dependencies need
to be installed.

1. If you encounter an error related to `libb64.so` from `triton profile`
or `perf_analyzer` such as:
```
perf_analyzer: error while loading shared libraries: libb64.so.0d
```

Then you likely need to install this system dependency:
```
apt install libb64-dev
```

2. If you encounter an error related to `libcudart.so` from `triton profile`
or `perf_analyzer` such as:
```
perf_analyzer: error while loading shared libraries: libcudart.so
```

Then you likely need to install the CUDA toolkit or set your `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
correctly. Refer to: https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads.

3. To build TensorRT LLM engines, you will need MPI installed in your environment.
MPI should be shipped in any relevant Triton or TRT-LLM containers, but if
building engines on host you can install them like so:
```
sudo apt install libopenmpi-dev
```

## Known Limitations
- Triton CLI's `profile` command currently only supports TRT-LLM and vLLM models.
- Models and configurations generated by Triton CLI are focused on ease-of-use,
and may not be as optimized as possible for your system or use case.
- Triton CLI currently uses the TRT-LLM dependencies installed in its environment
to build TRT-LLM engines, so you must take care to match the build-time and
run-time versions of TRT-LLM.
- Triton CLI currently does not support launching the server as a background
process.

Commit message:

Add note on server start and update git clone command (#50)

README.md, after:

# Triton Command Line Interface (Triton CLI)
> [!NOTE]
> Triton CLI is currently in BETA. Its features and functionality are likely
> to change as we collect feedback. We're excited to hear any thoughts you
> have (especially if you find the tool useful) and what features you'd like
> to see!

Triton CLI is an open source command line interface that enables users to
create, deploy, and profile models served by the Triton Inference
Server.

## Table of Contents

| [Pre-requisites](#pre-requisites) | [Installation](#installation) | [Quickstart](#quickstart) | [Serving LLM Models](#serving-llm-models) | [Serving a vLLM Model](#serving-a-vllm-model) | [Serving a TRT-LLM Model](#serving-a-trt-llm-model) | [Additional Dependencies for Custom Environments](#additional-dependencies-for-custom-environments) | [Known Limitations](#known-limitations) |

## Pre-requisites

When using Triton and related tools on your host (outside of a Triton container
image) there are a number of additional dependencies that may be required for
various workflows. Most system dependency issues can be resolved by installing
and running the CLI from within the latest corresponding `tritonserver`
container image, which should have all necessary system dependencies installed.

For vLLM and TRT-LLM, you can use their respective images:
- `nvcr.io/nvidia/tritonserver:{YY.MM}-vllm-python-py3`
- `nvcr.io/nvidia/tritonserver:{YY.MM}-trtllm-python-py3`

If you decide to run the CLI on the host or in a custom image, please
see this list of [additional dependencies](#additional-dependencies-for-custom-environments)
you may need to install.


## Installation

Currently, Triton CLI can only be installed from source, with plans to host a
pip wheel soon. When installing Triton CLI, please be aware of the versioning
matrix below:

| Triton CLI Version | TRT-LLM Version | Triton Container Tag |
|:------------------:|:---------------:|:--------------------:|
| 0.0.6 | v0.8.0 | 24.02 |
| 0.0.5 | v0.7.1 | 24.01 |

### Install from Source

```bash
# Clone repo for development/contribution
git clone https://github.com/triton-inference-server/triton_cli.git
cd triton_cli

# Should be pointing at directory containing pyproject.toml
pip install .
```

## Quickstart
The instructions below outline the process of deploying a simple `gpt2`
model using Triton's [vLLM backend](https://github.com/triton-inference-server/vllm_backend).
If you are not in an environment where the `tritonserver` executable is
present, Triton CLI will automatically generate and run a custom image
capable of serving the model. This behavior is subject to change.

> [!NOTE]
> `triton start` is a blocking command and will stream server logs to the
> current shell. To interact with the running server, you will need to start
> a separate shell and `docker exec` into the running container if using one.

```bash
# Explore the commands
triton -h

# Add a vLLM model to the model repository, downloaded from HuggingFace
triton import -m gpt2

# Start server pointing at the default model repository
triton start

# Infer with CLI
triton infer -m gpt2 --prompt "machine learning is"

# Infer with curl using the generate endpoint
curl -X POST localhost:8000/v2/models/gpt2/generate -d '{"text_input": "machine learning is", "max_tokens": 128}'

# Profile model with Perf Analyzer
triton profile -m gpt2
```

## Serving LLM Models

Triton CLI is particularly adept at simplifying the workflow to deploy and
interact with LLM models. The steps below illustrate how to serve a vLLM
or TRT-LLM model from scratch in minutes.

> [!NOTE]
> Usage of `llama-2-7b` requires authentication in Huggingface through either
> `huggingface-login` or setting the `HF_TOKEN` environment variable.

### Serving a vLLM Model

The following models have currently been tested for vLLM through the CLI:
- `gpt2`
- `llama-2-7b`
- `opt125m`
- `mistral-7b`
- `falcon-7b`

```bash
# Generate a Triton model repository containing a vLLM model config
triton remove -m all
triton import -m gpt2 --backend vllm

# Start Triton pointing at the default model repository
triton start

# Interact with model
triton infer -m gpt2 --prompt "machine learning is"

# Profile model with Perf Analyzer
triton profile -m gpt2
```

### Serving a TRT-LLM Model

> [!NOTE]
> By default, TRT-LLM engines are generated in `/tmp/engines/{model_name}`,
> such as `/tmp/engines/gpt2`. They are intentionally kept outside of the model
> repository to improve re-usability across examples and repositories. This
> default location is subject to change, but can be customized with the
> `ENGINE_DEST_PATH` environment variable.
>
> The model configurations generated by the CLI prioritize accessibility over
> performance. As such, the default number of model instances for each model
> will be set to 1. This value can be manually tuned post-generation by
> modifying the `instance_group` field in each model's corresponding
> `config.pbtxt` file. Increasing the instance counts may result in improved
> performance, especially for large batch sizes. For more information, please
> see [here](https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/triton-inference-server/user-guide/docs/user_guide/model_configuration.html#instance-groups).

#### Pre-requisites

(optional) If you don't want to install TRT-LLM dependencies on the host, you
can also run the following instructions inside of a container that is launched
with the following command:
```bash
# NOTE: Mounting the huggingface cache is optional, but will allow saving and
# re-using downloaded huggingface models across different runs and containers.

# NOTE: Mounting /tmp is also optional, but will allow the saving and re-use of
# TRT-LLM engines across different containers. This assumes the value of
# `ENGINE_DEST_PATH` has not been modified.

docker run -ti \
  --gpus all \
  --network=host \
  --shm-size=1g --ulimit memlock=-1 \
  -v /tmp:/tmp \
  -v $HOME/.cache/huggingface:/root/.cache/huggingface \
  nvcr.io/nvidia/tritonserver:24.02-trtllm-python-py3
```

Install the TRT-LLM dependencies:
```bash
# Install TRT LLM building dependencies
pip install \
  "psutil" \
  "pynvml>=11.5.0" \
  "torch==2.1.2" \
  "tensorrt_llm==0.8.0" --extra-index-url https://pypi.nvidia.com/
```

#### Example

The following models are currently supported for automating TRT-LLM
engine builds through the CLI:
> [!NOTE]
> Building a TRT-LLM engine for `llama-2-7b` will require a system
> with at least 64GB of RAM.
- `gpt2`
- `llama-2-7b`
-  `opt125m`

```bash
# Build TRT LLM engine and generate a Triton model repository pointing at it
triton remove -m all
triton import -m gpt2 --backend tensorrtllm

# Start Triton pointing at the default model repository
triton start

# Interact with model
triton infer -m gpt2 --prompt "machine learning is"

# Profile model with Perf Analyzer
triton profile -m gpt2 --backend tensorrtllm
```
## Additional Dependencies for Custom Environments

When using Triton CLI outside of official Triton NGC containers, you may
encounter the following issues, indicating additional dependencies need
to be installed.

1. If you encounter an error related to `libb64.so` from `triton profile`
or `perf_analyzer` such as:
```
perf_analyzer: error while loading shared libraries: libb64.so.0d
```

Then you likely need to install this system dependency:
```
apt install libb64-dev
```

2. If you encounter an error related to `libcudart.so` from `triton profile`
or `perf_analyzer` such as:
```
perf_analyzer: error while loading shared libraries: libcudart.so
```

Then you likely need to install the CUDA toolkit or set your `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
correctly. Refer to: https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads.

3. To build TensorRT LLM engines, you will need MPI installed in your environment.
MPI should be shipped in any relevant Triton or TRT-LLM containers, but if
building engines on host you can install them like so:
```
sudo apt install libopenmpi-dev
```

## Known Limitations
- Triton CLI's `profile` command currently only supports TRT-LLM and vLLM models.
- Models and configurations generated by Triton CLI are focused on ease-of-use,
and may not be as optimized as possible for your system or use case.
- Triton CLI currently uses the TRT-LLM dependencies installed in its environment
to build TRT-LLM engines, so you must take care to match the build-time and
run-time versions of TRT-LLM.
- Triton CLI currently does not support launching the server as a background
process.
